Copilot vs Cody blog post (#6565)
sourcegraph/about: content/blogposts/2023/copilot-vs-cody.md

## Scenario: Learning about a codebase

For our first scenario, let's place ourselves in the shoes of a new developer onboarding onto a codebase. Without a code AI assistant, the developer would likely first look at the `readme.md` file to see if it gives a good overview or perhaps reach out to the maintainer of the codebase for a walkthrough.

In my personal experience, the `readme.md` files of projects are often hit or miss. They may include an amazing overview and instructions, or they may be completely blank and everything in between. With a code AI assistant that supports chat functionality, we can ask it to tell us what a codebase does. Let's try it with Cody and Copilot to see which one does better.

Our query will be: **"What does this application do?"**

> ![Explain what a codebase does](https://storage.googleapis.com/sourcegraph-assets/blog/github-copilot-vs-cody-context-driven-development/explain-what-codebase-does.png)

Reviewer: Can we give this a clearer label so the user doesn't have to consult the paragraph to determine which is Cody vs Copilot?

> Both Cody and Copilot were able to give us an answer to our query. Cody is on the left-hand side, and Copilot is on the right, and we'll use this format throughout the post. Copilot told us about the different technologies used in the repository, while Cody told us the tech stack, APIs used, as well as the major features of the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both Cody and Copilot were able to give us an answer to our query. Cody is on the left-hand side, and Copilot is on the right. Copilot told us about the different technologies used in the repository, while Cody told us the tech stack, APIs used, as well as the major features of the application.
```

Reviewer: Actually, I think we can be a bit more direct in our critique here:

```suggestion
Copilot just listed some of the technologies used in the codebase, but it didn't really answer the question of what this application actually does. Meanwhile, Cody tells us correctly that the application's purpose is to process YouTube videos and does a better job of calling out key technologies in use, such as the Laravel PHP web framework.
```

**Cody also cites its sources**, and we can see in the above screenshot that Cody used 14 files from our codebase to get enough context to generate a detailed response. Copilot, on the other hand, does not provide visibility into how it came up with the answer.

I think we can give Cody the win in our first scenario. After round one, the score stands at:

Cody - 1

Copilot - 0

## Scenario: Setting up the development environment

Now that our developer knows a little bit about what the application does, the next logical thing for them to do is to figure out how to set up the local development environment so that they can run the application and make code changes themselves. Without a code AI assistant, the developer would again likely search for a `readme.md` file or similar instructions on how to get set up. But with Cody and Copilot ready, we can ask them how to get this application running locally.

The query we'll pose is: **"How do I start this app up in development mode?"**

![Setup development environment](https://storage.googleapis.com/sourcegraph-assets/blog/github-copilot-vs-cody-context-driven-development/setup-dev-environment.png)

> Both Cody and Copilot were able to give us a response to this question as well. The difference between the two responses again highlights the importance of having the right context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The difference in response quality here call out the importance of having quality context in code AI tools.
```

> Cody read 12 files to generate the response and walked the developer through installing the required JavaScript and PHP dependencies, setting up an `.env` file, creating a local database, running a database migration to set up the correct tables and seed data, and finally starting the server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cody read 12 files to generate the response and walked us through installing the required JavaScript and PHP dependencies, setting up an `.env` file, creating a local database, running a database migration to set up the correct tables and seed data, and finally starting the server.
```

Reviewer: Just a general suggestion: I think it reads better if we put ourselves and the reader in the shoes of the developer and use "we"/"us". If we make this change, we should update the language throughout the post.

> Copilot, on the other hand, initially told us to navigate to the project directory, but since we are already in the project directory, this step is unnecessary. Copilot then told us to install the dependencies and run the project. But there were some glaring issues. Without a proper `.env` file in the project directory, the app will not start. Not only that, but the `npm start` command, while common in Node and JavaScript projects, does not exist in this codebase. To start the local server, this codebase requires running the `npm run dev` command, which Cody correctly suggested.

Reviewer: I would mention Copilot first, since that is the worse example and IMO it flows more naturally to go from worse to better here.

The way I'd summarize the Copilot response is "It's as if Copilot only knows that we're using JavaScript and PHP in this repository and made some very rough guesses at what commands might need to be used to set up a dev environment for those languages. Meanwhile, Cody gives more of a response you'd expect to get from an experienced engineer who actually took the time to read through the setup docs in the project.

Cody - 2

Copilot - 0

## Scenario: Familiarize yourself with the code

Now that we know a bit about what the application does and have it running locally, let's ask our code AI assistants some questions about how the actual application functions. In this application, we'll be working a lot with video files, so let's ask about the current capabilities that exist. The first question we'll ask is: **"What are the properties on the video model?"**

![Explain feature of a codebase](https://storage.googleapis.com/sourcegraph-assets/blog/github-copilot-vs-cody-context-driven-development/explain-feature-of-codebase.png)

Cody finds the `Video` model and provides us with the various properties that are present on it. Copilot states that it does not have direct access to our codebase and therefore does not know what properties exist on the `Video` model. It does try to guess and assume some properties that may or may not exist.

> Getting the properties of a model is neat, but not something to necessarily write home about. Let's try a more tricky question. In this project, we spend a lot of time working with LLMs and one of the most important things is keeping track of costs. Let's ask our code AI assistants how we can calculate our costs for a video. The query will be: **"How do I calculate the OpenAI cost for a video?"**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Getting the properties of a model is neat, but not something to necessarily write home about. Let's try a trickier question. In this project, we spend a lot of time working with LLMs and one of the most important things is keeping track of costs. Let's ask our code AI assistants how we can calculate our costs for a video. The query will be: **"How do I calculate the OpenAI cost for a video?"**
```

![Explain calculating costs of OpenAI call](https://storage.googleapis.com/sourcegraph-assets/blog/github-copilot-vs-cody-context-driven-development/calculate-costs-explain.png)

> Cody is able to find an existing function called `calculateOpenAICost()` and gives us a detailed explanation of what this function does, how it works, and where it's located if we want to learn more. Copilot on the other hand gives us a general answer on how to calculate the cost of an OpenAI call and some pricing information. With these two examples, I think we can give Cody the win here as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cody is able to find an existing function called `calculateOpenAICost()` and gives us a detailed explanation of what this function does, how it works, and where it's located if we want to learn more. Copilot on the other hand gives us some generic suggestions on how to calculate the cost of an OpenAI call, which we'll then have to dive deeper into and validate ourselves. With these two examples, I think we can give Cody the win here as well.
```

Cody - 3

Copilot - 0

## Scenario: Adding new functionality to our codebase

> Now we get to the fun parts - writing code. As developers, we are accustomed to having our IDE making it easier to write code through syntax highlighting, intellisense, and other enhancements that make it easier for us to focus on the hard parts. Code AI assistants can go a step further here in writing some or a lot of the code for us.

Reviewer 2: "IntelliSense" is stylized in VS Code's docs - should it be here, or is it lowercase when used more generally?

```suggestion
Now we get to the fun parts - writing code. As developers, we are accustomed to having our IDE making it easier to write code through syntax highlighting, IntelliSense, and other enhancements that make it easier for us to focus on the hard parts. Code AI assistants can go a step further here in writing some or a lot of the code for us.
```

> Now we get to the fun parts - writing code. As developers, we are accustomed to having our IDE making it easier to write code through syntax highlighting, intellisense, and other enhancements that make it easier for us to focus on the hard parts. Code AI assistants can go a step further here in writing some or a lot of the code for us.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we get to the fun part--writing code. As developers, we are accustomed to having our IDE making it easier to write code through syntax highlighting, intellisense, and other enhancements that make it easier for us to focus on the hard parts. Code AI assistants can go a step further here in writing some or a lot of the code for us.
```

For our next scenario, we want to add a new [action](https://laravelactions.com/2.x/one-class-one-task.html) to our codebase that will allow us to trim a video. This will allow us to splice up longer videos into smaller more manageable files for further processing. The API that we are using to trim the video requires that we give it the trim start and end times in a [SMPTE timecode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SMPTE_timecode) format. In our codebase, we store all video durations in milliseconds. So what we need to do is to add a function to convert our start and end times from milliseconds to a valid SMPTE timecode format.

> We can write this function ourselves or we can ask our code AI assistants to do it. Let's opt for the latter. **"Write a function to convert milliseconds to a timecode format"** is our query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can write this function ourselves or we can ask our code AI assistants to do it. Let's opt for the latter. Our query is: **"Write a function to convert milliseconds to a timecode format"**.
```

This is another perfect example of why context is so important. Cody inferred that since we have a `.php` file open, we probably want our implementation in PHP, whereas Copilot lacking the context gave us a general solution in a different language. If we were to insert the two functions into our file, the Cody `millisecondsToTimecode` function would work, but the Copilot `msToTimecode` would throw all sorts of errors. Cody wins here as well, but we'll give Copilot half a point because it did give us a working solution.

Cody - 4

Copilot - 0.5

## Scenario: Editing code in our codebase

We'll use the `millisecondsToTimecode` function that Cody gave us and continue adding functionality to our application. The timecode conversion function that both Cody and Copilot returned gives us a string in the format of "00:00:00" and while this is valid, we should also add the number of frames between a second. This will ensure that we trim the video at max precision. So the full format becomes hour:minute:second:frame.

> To get the frame count we'll need to know the frame rate at which the video was encoded as well as what the remainder of milliseconds if any we have for our trim operation. Let's ask Cody and Copilot to update the existing function to accommodate our needs.

Reviewer 2: This sentence read a little funky to me - adding a suggestion from grammarly.

```suggestion
To get the frame count, we'll need to know the frame rate at which the video was encoded and the remainder of milliseconds, if any, we have for our trim operation. Let's ask Cody and Copilot to update the existing function to accommodate our needs.
```

![Using code AI to edit functionality](https://storage.googleapis.com/sourcegraph-assets/blog/github-copilot-vs-cody-context-driven-development/edit-function-with-new-functionality.png)

> For Cody, with my `TrimVideoAction.php` file open, I was able to say **"add the frame number to the timecode"** and Cody had enough context to understand that I was talking about the `millisecondsToTimecode()` function and it gave me an updated function that also added the number of left-over frames if any.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For Cody, with my `TrimVideoAction.php` file open, I was able to say **"add the frame number to the timecode"** and Cody had enough context to understand that I was talking about the `millisecondsToTimecode()` function, and it gave me an updated function that also added the number of left-over frames if any.
```

> For Copilot, I tried the same query, but Copilot could not understand that I wanted to update the `millisecondsToTimecode()` function, so eventually I had to ask the question and copy and paste the function into the chat window to get a working result. Copilot was able to understand my prompt and returned an updated `millisecondsToTimecode()` function that also returned the frame count. The one thing that I think Copilot did better was it made the frame rate a parameter. Videos typically have varying frame rates typically ranging from 24fps to 30fps, and the frame rate is something we store in the `Video` model as a value because each video is different, so this was a nice touch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For Copilot, I tried the same query, but Copilot could not understand that I wanted to update the `millisecondsToTimecode()` function, so eventually I had to ask the question and copy and paste the function into the chat window to get a working result. Copilot was able to understand my prompt and returned an updated `millisecondsToTimecode()` function that also returned the frame count. The one thing that I think Copilot did better was it made the frame rate a parameter. Videos typically have varying frame rates ranging from 24fps to 30fps, and the frame rate is something we store in the `Video` model as a value because each video is different, so this was a nice touch.
```

Author: I will keep typically as a lot of videos are 24-30fps, but videos can be any fps like 60, 70, 100+.

> Cody also supports commands, and one of the most used commands is the `/edit` command which allows us to highlight a piece of code, and tell Cody to update it based on the prompt. I ran the `/edit` command and asked Cody to make the frame rate a parameter and it was also able to achieve the task.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cody also supports commands, and one of the most used commands is the `/edit` command, which allows us to highlight a piece of code and tell Cody to update it based on the prompt. I ran the `/edit` command and asked Cody to make the frame rate a parameter, and it was also able to achieve the task.
```

This really highlights the importance of having the right context. With the right context, a code AI assistant can be a helpful ally, but with bad or the wrong context, it causes more trouble than it's worth. If you'd like to learn more about the lifecycle of a Cody code completion, check out [this in-depth blog post](https://about.sourcegraph.com/blog/the-lifecycle-of-a-code-ai-completion).

Moving forward, when I navigated to the next line, both Cody and Copilot gave me the next autocompletion to convert the `$beginInMilliseconds` value to a timecode format exactly the same.

![Cody and Copilot correct autocomplete suggestion](https://storage.googleapis.com/sourcegraph-assets/blog/github-copilot-vs-cody-context-driven-development/next-autocomplete.png)

Testing this code works and we're able to successfully convert our milliseconds to a timecode format that will allow our API to trim the video at the precise time we declare. For our final autocompletion test, let's see if our code AI assistant can help us with the next steps which will be to call the [AWS Elemental MediaConvert](https://aws.amazon.com/mediaconvert/) API to process the video trimming.

> I will start us off by adding a comment `// Call AWS Elemental Media Convert API to trim video` will hit enter and observe what each code AI assistant does.

Reviewer 2: I think this sentence is missing something -- is this correct?

```suggestion
I will start us off by adding the comment `// Call AWS Elemental Media Convert API to trim video`, hitting enter, and observing what each code AI assistant does.
```

![Media Convert autocomplete](https://storage.googleapis.com/sourcegraph-assets/blog/github-copilot-vs-cody-context-driven-development/media-convert-autocomplete.png)

> Since we make extensive use of the AWS Elemental MediaConvert API, Cody was able to find how we've invoked it in other actions, and gave us helpful completions every step of the way. What really blew me away was the fact that it also found and suggested the required endpoint in our AWS client configuration for this API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since we make extensive use of the AWS Elemental MediaConvert API, Cody was able to find how we've invoked it in other actions and gave us helpful completions every step of the way. What really blew me away was the fact that it also found and suggested the required endpoint in our AWS client configuration for this API.
```
